7. Now when he had ended all his sayings, in the audience of the people he entered into
Capernaum. And a certain centurion servant, who was dear unto him, was sick, and ready
to die. And when he heard of Jesus, he sent unto him the elders of the Jews, beseeching
him that he would come and heal his servant. And when they came to Jesus, they besought
him instantly, saying, That he was worthy for whom he should do this, for he loveth
our nation, and he hath built us a synagogue. Then Jesus went with them, and when he was
far from the house, the centurion sent friends to him, saying unto him, Lord, trouble not
thyself, for I am not worthy that thou shouldest enter under my roof. Wherefore neither thought
I myself worthy to come unto thee, but say in a word, and my servant shall be healed.
For I also am a man set under authority, having under me soldiers, and I say unto one, Go,
and he goeth, and to another, Come, and he cometh, and to my servant do this, and he
doeth it. When Jesus heard these things, he marveled at him, and turned him about, and
said unto the people that followed him, I say unto you, I have not found so great faith,
no, not in Israel. And they that were sent, returning to the house, found the servant
whole that had been sick. And it came to pass the day after that he went into a city called
Nain, and many of his disciples went with him, and much people. Now when he came nigh to the
gate of the city, behold, there was a dead man carried out, the only son of his mother,
and she was a widow, and much people of the city was with her. And when the Lord saw her,
he had compassion on her, and said unto her, Weep not. And he came and touched the beer,
and they that bear him stood still. And he said, Young man, I say unto thee, Arise. And he that
was dead sat up, and began to speak. And he delivered him to his mother. And there came a
fear on all, and they glorified God, saying, That a great prophet is risen up among us,
and that God hath visited his people. And this rumor of him went forth throughout all Judea,
and throughout all the region round about. And the disciples of John showed him of all these
things. And John, calling unto him two of his disciples, sent them to Jesus, saying, Art thou
he that should come, or look we for another? When the men were coming to him, they said, John
Baptist hath sent us unto thee, saying, Art thou he that should come, or look we for another?
And in that same hour he cured many of their infirmities and plagues, and of evil spirits,
and unto many that were blind he gave sight. Then Jesus answering said unto them, Go your way,
and tell John what things ye have seen and heard. How that the blind see, the lame walk,
the lepers are cleansed, the deaf hear, the dead are raised, to the poor the gospel is preached.
And blessed is he whosoever shall not be offended in me.
And when the messengers of John were departed, he began to speak unto the people concerning John.
What went ye out into the wilderness for to see, a reed shaken with the wind?
But what went ye out for to see, a man clothed in soft raiment? Behold, they which are gorgeously
appareled and live delicately, are in king's courts. But what went ye out for to see, a prophet?
Yea, I say unto you, and much more than a prophet. This is he of whom it is written,
Behold, I send my messenger before thy face, which shall prepare thy way before thee.
For I say unto you, among those that are born of women, there is not a greater prophet than John
the Baptist. But he that is least in the kingdom of God is greater than he.
And all the people that heard him and the publicans justified God being baptized with
the baptism of John. But the Pharisees and lawyers rejected the counsel of God against themselves
being not baptized of him. And the Lord said, Whereunto then shall I liken the men of this
generation? And to what are they like? They are likened to children sitting in the marketplace
and calling one to another and saying, We have piped unto you, and ye have not danced.
We have mourned to you, and ye have not wept. For John the Baptist came neither eating bread
nor drinking wine, and ye say, He hath a devil. The Son of Man is come eating and drinking,
and ye say, Behold, a gluttonous man and a wine-bibber, a friend of publicans and sinners.
But wisdom is justified of all her children. And one of the Pharisees desired him that he
would eat with him, and he went into the Pharisee's house and sat down to meet.
And behold, a woman in the city, which was a sinner, when she knew that Jesus sat at meat
in the Pharisee's house, brought an alabaster box of ointment, and stood at his feet behind him
and began to wash his feet with tears, and did wipe them with the hairs of her head,
and kissed his feet, and anointed them with the ointment. Now when the Pharisee which had
bidden him saw it, he spake within himself, saying, This man, if he were a prophet,
would have known who and what manner of woman this is that toucheth him, for she is a sinner.
And Jesus answering said unto him, Simon, I have somewhat to say unto thee,
and he sayeth, Master, say on. There was a certain creditor which had two debtors,
the one owed five hundred pence and the other fifty, and when they had nothing to pay he
frankly forgave them both. Tell me therefore which of them will love him most. Simon answered and
said, I suppose that he to whom he forgave most. And he said unto him, Thou hast rightly judged.
And he turned to the woman and said unto Simon, Seest thou this woman? I entered into thine house,
thou gavest me no water for my feet. But she hath washed my feet with tears and wiped them
with the hairs of her head. Thou gavest me no kiss, but this woman since the time I came in
hath not ceased to kiss my feet. My head with oil thou didst not anoint, but this woman hath
anointed my feet with ointment. Wherefore I say unto thee, Her sins which are many are forgiven,
for she loved much, but to whom little is forgiven the same loveth little. And he said unto her,
Thy sins are forgiven. And they that sat at meet with him began to say within themselves,
Who is this that forgiveth sins also? And he said to the woman, Thy faith hath saved thee. Go in
peace. Chapter 8. And it came to pass afterward that he went throughout every city and village
preaching and showing the glad tidings of the kingdom of God, and the twelve were with him.
And certain women which had been healed of evil spirits and infirmities, Mary called Magdalene,
out of whom went seven devils, and Joanna, the wife of Chusa, Herod's steward, and Susanna,
and many others, which ministered unto him of their substance. And when much people were gathered
together and were come to him out of every city, he spake by a parable. A sower went out to sow his
seed, and as he sowed, some fell by the wayside, and it was trodden down, and the fowls of the air
devoured it. And some fell upon a rock, and as soon as it was sprung up it withered away because
it lacked moisture. And some fell among thorns, and the thorns sprang up with it and choked it.
And other fell on good ground and sprang up and bare fruit and hundredfold. And when he had said
these things, he cried, He that hath ears to hear, let him hear. And his disciples asked him saying,
What might this parable be? And he said, Unto you it is given to know the mysteries of the kingdom
of God, but to others in parables, that seeing they might not see, and hearing they might not
understand. Now the parable is this, The seed is the word of God. Those by the wayside are they that
hear, then cometh the devil and taketh away the word out of their hearts, lest they should believe
and be saved. They on the rock are they which, when they hear, receive the word with joy, and these
have no root, which for a while believe and in time of temptation fall away. And that which fell
among thorns are they which, when they have heard, go forth and are choked with cares and riches
and pleasures of this life, and bring no fruit to perfection. But that on the good ground are they
which, in an honest and good heart, having heard the word, keep it and bring forth fruit with
patience. No man when he hath lighted a candle covereth it with a vessel, or putteth it under
a bed, but setteth it on a candlestick, that they which enter in may see the light. For nothing is
secret that shall not be made manifest, neither anything hid that shall not be known and come
abroad. Take heed therefore how ye hear, for whosoever hath to him shall be given, and whosoever
hath not from him shall be taken even that which he seemeth to have. Then came to him his mother
and his brethren, and could not come at him for the press. And it was told him by certain which
said, Thy mother and thy brethren stand without, desiring to see thee. And he answered and said
unto them, My mother and my brethren are these which hear the word of God, and do it. Now it
came to pass on a certain day that he went into a ship with his disciples, and he said unto them,
Let us go over unto the other side of the lake. And they launched forth. But as they sailed he
fell asleep, and there came down a storm of wind on the lake, and they were filled with water
and were in jeopardy. And when they came to him and awoke him saying, Master, Master, we perish!
Then he arose and rebuked the wind and the raging of the water, and they ceased, and there was a
calm. And he said unto them, Where is your faith? And they, being afraid, wondered, saying one to
another, What manner of man is this? for he commandeth even the winds and water, and they obey him.
And they arrived at the country of the Gadarenes, which is over against Galilee, and when he went
forth to land there met him out of the city a certain man which had devils long time, and
clothes, neither abode in any house, but in the tombs. When he saw Jesus he cried out and
fell down before him, and with a loud voice said, What have I to do with thee, Jesus,
thou son of God most high? I beseech thee, torment me not. For he had commanded the unclean
spirit to come out of the man. For often times it had caught him, and he was kept bound with
chains and in fetters, and he break the bands, and was driven of the devil into the wilderness.
And Jesus asked him, saying, What is thy name? And he said, Legion, because many devils were
entered into him, and they besought him that he would not command them to go out into the deep.
And there was there and heard of many swine feeding on the mountain, and they besought him
he would suffer them to enter into them, and he suffered them. Then went the devils out of the
man and entered into the swine, and the herd ran violently down a steep place into the lake,
and were choked. When they that fed them saw what was done, they fled and went and told it in the
city and in the country. Then they went out to see what was done, and came to Jesus, and found the
man out of whom the devils were departed, sitting at the feet of Jesus, clothed, and in his right mind,
and they were afraid. They also which saw it told them by what means he that was possessed of the
devils was healed. Then the whole multitude of the country of the Gadarenes round about besought him
to depart from them, for they were taken with great fear, and he went up into the ship and
returned back again. Now the man out of whom the devils were departed besought him that he might be
with him, but Jesus sent him away saying, return to thine own house and show how great things God
hath done unto thee. And he went his way and published throughout the whole city how great
things Jesus had done unto him. And it came to pass that when Jesus was returned the people
gladly received him, for they were all waiting for him. And behold there came a man named Jairus,
and he was a ruler of the synagogue, and he fell down at Jesus's feet, and besought him that he
would come into his house, for he had one only daughter, about twelve years of age, and she lay
a dying. But as he went the people thronged him, and a woman having an issue of blood twelve years,
which had spent all her living upon physicians, neither could be healed of any, came behind him
and touched the border of his garment, and immediately her issue of blood staunched. And
Jesus said, Who touched me? When all denied, Peter and they that were with him said, Master,
the multitude throng thee and press thee, and sayest thou who touched me? And Jesus said,
Somebody hath touched me, for I perceive that virtue is gone out of me. And when the woman saw
that she was not hit, she came trembling, and falling down before him, she declared unto him
before all the people for what cause she had touched him, and how she was healed immediately.
And he said unto her, Daughter, be of good comfort, thy faith hath made thee whole,
go in peace. While he yet spake, there cometh one from the ruler of the synagogue's house,
saying to him, Thy daughter is dead, trouble not the master. But when Jesus heard it, he answered
him saying, Fear not, believe only, and she shall be made whole. And when he came into the house,
he suffered no man to go in, save Peter and James and John, and the father and the mother of the
people wept, and bewailed her. But he said, Weep not, she is not dead, but sleepeth. And they
laughed him to scorn, knowing that she was dead. And he put them all out, and took her by the hand,
and called, saying, Maid, arise. And her spirit came again, and she arose straightway, and he
commanded to give her meat. And her parents were astonished, but he charged them that they should
tell no man what was done. End of chapters 7 and 8.